The Improvement of Negative Sentences Translation in English-to-Korean 

Machine Translation 

 

Jang Chung Hyok 

Kim Kwang Hyok   

Foreign Language Faculty 

Computer Science College 

Kim Il Sung University 

Kim Il Sung University 

Pyongyang, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea 

 

Abstract 

This paper describes the algorithm for translating English negative sentences into Korean in 

English-Korean  Machine  Translation  (EKMT).  The  proposed  algorithm  is  based  on  the 

comparative study of English and Korean negative sentences. The earlier translation software 

cannot translate English negative sentences into accurate Korean equivalents. We established 

a new algorithm for the negative sentence translation and evaluated it. 

Key Words: machine translation, negative sentence, negation 

 

Introduction 

Translating  English  negative  sentences  into  Korean  is  fairly  challenging  since  the  ways  of 

expressing  negation  in  the  two  languages  are  not  exactly  the  same.  The  generally  accepted 

way of the negative sentence translation  in  EKMT was to  simply negate  the predicate of its 

corresponding  affirmative  sentence,  which  cannot  give  the  accurate  Korean  equivalent  for 

some English negative sentences, e.g. partial negatives. We did linguistic comparison between 

the  ways  of  expressing  negation  in  English  and  Korean  and  propose  an  algorithm  for  the 

accurate Korean equivalents to the English negative sentences in EKMT. 

1.  Linguistic comparison of English and Korean negation   

Linguistically, negation refers to a grammatical construction with negative polarity [1]. The 

negative sentence and its affirmative correspondent are closely related in  English and so are 

they in Korean. This requires that we should consider the English negative sentences in close 

relation with their affirmative correspondents and Korean equivalents. 

English and Korean negative sentences have the following features in common; 

a.  The  negative  sentences  are  declaratives,  interrogatives  or  imperatives  in  both 

languages. 

b.  The  negative  sentences  have  their  affirmative  correspondents,  which  can  be  made 

negative by adding negative words. 

 

1 

c.  Negative words are relatively restricted in number. 

d.  In  some  cases,  the  negative  words  are  used  with  other  negation-related  words  to 

intensify or soften the negation. 

e.  Negation  is  subdivided  into  general  negation,  partial  negation,  double  negation  and 

intensified negation. 

Despite these common features, there are still differences, the most important one of which 

is  the way of adding  negative words to  the affirmative sentences. The table below gives the 

comparison  between  English  and  Korean  negative  sentences.  The  underlined  words  are  the 

negative words and the bold words are the negation-related words in English and Korean. 

 

 

Part of 

Negative 

English Negative 

Speech 

Words 

Sentences 

Korean Equivalents 

Corresponding 

Affirmative Sentences 

I  did  not  believe  at  all  that 

나는  그가  온다는것을  전혀 

I  believed 

that  he  was 

he was coming. 

믿지  않았다. 

coming. 

Not  much  is  known  about 

그  질병에  대하여  많은것이 

Much  is  known  about  the 

the disease. 

알려지지는  않았다. 

disease. 

Not  many  people  have  read 

많은  사람들이  그  기사를 

Many  people  have  read  the 

the report. 

읽은것은  아니다. 

report. 

Not  one  of  the  students 

학생들가운데서  한사람도 

One  of  the  students  could 

could answer. 

대답할수  없었다. 

answer. 

He has never been there. 

He has been there. 

그는  거기에  가본적이  전혀 

없다. 

not 

never 

Adverb 

Never  again  would  he  say 

그는  다시는  그런  말을  하지 

that. 

않을것이다. 

He would say that again. 

hardly 

I can hardly believe it. 

I can believe it. 

나는  그것을  거의나  믿을수 

없다. 

나는 

나의 

생활이 

Little  did  I  know  that  my 

I  knew  that  my  life  was 

little 

변하리라는것을  거의나  알지 

life was about to change. 

about to change. 

못하였다. 

nowhere 

nothing 

He has nowhere to live. 

그는  살곳이  없다. 

I am going nowhere. 

나는  아무데도  가지  않는다. 

She's  nothing 

like  her 

그는  자기의  동생과  전혀 

brother. 

비슷하지  않다. 

He has somewhere to live. 

She's like her brother. 

2 

She  seems  none  the  worse 

그는  자기  경험에  비하여 

She seems the worse for her 

none 

for her experience. 

한심해보이지는  않는다. 

experience. 

no one 

No one could hear me. 

Someone could hear me. 

그  누구도  나의  말을  듣지 

못하였다. 

I  knocked  on  the  door  but 

내가  문을  두드렸지만  그 

I  knocked  on  the  door  and 

nobody 

nobody answered. 

누구도  대답하지  않았다. 

somebody answered. 

nothing 

We said nothing about her. 

Pronoun 

아무것도  말하지  않았다. 

her. 

우리는 

그에 

대하여 

We  said  something  about 

none 

little 

None  of  my  friends  phones 

Some  of  my  friends  phone 

내  친구들중  그  누구도 

me any more. 

나에게  더  이상  전화하지 

me. 

않는다. 

Little  is  known  about  the 

그  문제의  원인에  대해서는 

Something  is  known  about 

causes of the problem. 

거의  알려지지  않았다. 

the causes of the problem. 

no 

No food is left in the fridge. 

하나도  없다. 

fridge 

랭동기에는  음식이  남은것이 

Some  food  is  left  in  the 

few 

Few people knew he was ill. 

Determiner 

사람은  거의  없다. 

ill. 

그가  앓는다는것을  아는 

Some  people  knew  he  was 

I paid little attention to what 

I  paid  attention  to  what  the 

little 

말에  거의  관심을  돌리지 

the others were saying. 

others were saying. 

나는  다른  사람들이  하는 

않았다. 

 

 

Table 1. Comparison between English and Korean negative sentences 

As the table shows the negative words in English include adverbs, pronouns and determiners, 

therefore the subject, predicate, object, adverbial modifiers or attributes can be negated, while 

in Korean the negation is expressed by adding agglutinative suffixes (the underlined words in 

Korean  sentences)  to  the  predicates  and  by  adding  other  related  words  (the  bold  words  in 

Korean  sentences)  to  the  sentences  in  some  cases.  This  significant  difference  poses  a  main 

problem for the translation of the English negative sentences into Korean. 

2.  Classification of English negative sentences 

Some  English  sentences  with  negative  words  are  not  negative  sentences,  so  they  are  not 

translated into Korean negative sentences. 

He just stopped working for no reason. (그는  아무  리유도  없이  일을  그만두었다.) 

The victory was nothing less than a miracle. (그  승리는  그야말로  기적이였다.) 

 

3 

Also, the following examples show that there is a big difference in word order between the 

negative  sentence  and  its  corresponding  affirmative  sentence  in  English,  while  their  Korean 

equivalents have less difference except the negative words and the negation-related words. 

Little did I know that my life was about to change. 

(나는  나의  생활이  변하리라는것을  거의나  알지  못하였다.) 

I knew that my life was about to change. 

(나는  나의  생활이  변하리라는것을  알고있었다.) 

Considering the features described above, we concluded that it is very important  to  decide 

whether  the  sentence  with  a  negative  word  is  a  negative  sentence  and  what  sort  of  negative 

sentence it is. 

a. If the subject, predicate or the object of the sentence is negated or a negative word itself, it 

is a negative sentence. 

No one could hear me. (negative subject) 

We said nothing about her. (negative object) 

He has never been there. (negative predicate) 

However, if the negative word is not the subject, object or predicate of a sentence but a part 

of  an  idiomatic  expression  (e.g.  for  no  reason,  be  nothing  less  than,  etc),  the  Korean 

equivalent might not be a negative sentence. 

b. We subdivided the English negative sentences  into single negative  (one negative word in 

the  sentence)  and  double  negative  sentences  (two  or  more  negative  words  in  the  sentence) 

according  to  the  number  of  negative  words  in  the  sentence,  and  also  into  general  negative, 

partial negative and intensified negative sentences according to the part of sentence which is 

negated. 

The Korean equivalent of the general negative sentence can be made from its corresponding 

affirmative  sentence  by  adding  agglutinative  suffix,  while  those  of  the  partial  negative  and 

intensified negative sentences require other negation-related words as well. 

3.  Translation of English negative sentences 

3.1 The determination of English negative sentence 

To translate English negative sentence, the parser should decide; 

a. whether the sentence with a negative word is a negative sentence. 

According to which part of the sentence is negated, we subdivided the negative sentences 

into six categories; 

  Negative Subject – Affirmative Predicate – Affirmative Object (NS-AP-AO) 

  Negative Subject – Negative Predicate – Affirmative Object (NS-NP-AO) 

 

4 

  Negative Subject – Affirmative Predicate – Negative Object (NS-AP-NO) 

  Affirmative Subject – Affirmative Predicate – Negative Object (AS-AP-NO) 

  Affirmative Subject – Negative Predicate – Affirmative Object (AS-NP-AO) 

  Affirmative Subject – Negative Predicate – Negative Object (AS-NP-NO) 

If the sentence matches one of the above sentence structures, the parser decides that it is 

a negative sentence. 

b. what sort of negative sentence it is. 

According to the number of negative words and the negated part of sentence we conclude 

that; 

  Single negative sentence is general negative, partial negative or intensified negative. 

The negative sentence with negative subject, negative object or negative predicate which 

is  modified  by  the  words  like  ‘every,  all,  always,  entirely,  necessarily,  etc’  is  a  partial 

negative sentence. 

  Single  negative  sentence  with  negative  predicate  which  is  not  a  partial  negative 

sentence is a general negative sentence. 

  Single  negative  sentence  with  negative  subject  or  negative  object  which  is  not  a 

partial negative sentence is an intensified negative sentence. 

  Double negative sentence is an intensified negative sentence. 

c.  which  negative  agglutinative  suffixes  and  related  words  should  be  added  to  the 

corresponding Korean affirmative sentence. 

Korean  language  has  various  negative  agglutinative  suffixes  to  the  predicate  such  as 

“~이  아니다”,  “~지  못하다”,  “~지  않다”  and  “~지  말다”.  It  is  not  easy  to  decide 

which  one  makes  a  natural  expression  in  Korean.  In  3.2  and  3.3,  we  describe  the 

principles  to  choose  correct  suffixes  and  related  words  to  the  corresponding  Korean 

affirmative sentences. 

3.2 Negative agglutinative suffixes to Korean predicate 

The negative agglutinative suffixes to Korean predicate is decided by; 

a. The kind of predicate verb in English sentence and its tense and aspect 

If  the  predicate  is  “a  copular  verb  +  noun”,  add  “~이  아니다”  or  “~이  없다”  to  the 

predicate of the Korean affirmative sentence, and if the predicate is a lexical verb and the 

auxiliary verb do is used, add “~지  않다” or “~지  못하다”. 

She is not my younger sister. 

그  녀자는  나의  녀동생이  아니다. 

He doesn’t get up early in the morning. 

 

5 

그는  아침  일찍  일어나지  않는다. 

If the predicate is a lexical verb in perfect aspect, add “~ㄴ적이  없다” . 

He has never been there. 

그는  거기에  가본적이  없다. 

b. The kind of English negative sentence 

If the negative sentence is a general negative, the above rule is applied to choose a suffix 

to Korean predicate. 

If  it  is  an  intensified  negative,  the  Korean  negative  suffix  is  added  as  general  negative 

sentence. 

No trains will be affected by this accident. 

렬차들은  이  사고에  의하여  전혀  영향을  받지  않을것이다. 

He has made promises, but kept none of them. 

그는  약속을  하였지만  하나도  지키지  않았다. 

If it is a partial negative, the agglutinative suffix “~ㄴ것은  아니다” is added. 

It is not always true that combining two substances into one releases energy. 

두  물질을  하나로  결합하면  에네르기가  방출된다는것이  언제나  진실인것은 

아니다. 

If an auxiliary verb is negated in a partial negative sentence, the suffixes “~지는  않다” 

or  “~수는  없다”  is  added  to  the  Korean  equivalent  of  the  lexical  verb  and  change  it 

according to the tense of the English predicate. 

The particles will not necessarily move the same way under identical conditions. 

립자들이  동일한  조건에서  반드시  같은  방식으로  움직이지는  않을것이다.○ 

립자들이  동일한  조언에서  반드시  같은  방식으로  움직일것이지는  않다.    × 

c. The collocation of the Korean predicate 

In Korean, the terminative predicates of sentences are verbs or adjectives.  According to 

the characteristics of Korean verb or adjective collocation, the suffix “~지  않다” or “~지 

못하다” is added. 

Their effort accomplished little or nothing. 

그들의  노력은  거의  아무것도  달성하지  못하였다. ○ 

그들의  노력은  거의  아무것도  달성하지  않았다. × 

The  Korean  equivalents  of  some  English  negative  predicates  are  completely  different 

from  their  Korean  affirmatives,  thus  making  them  impossible  to  be  negated  by  adding 

agglutinative suffixes. In this case, the Korean predicate is replaced by appropriate word. 

I don’t know what these symbols mean. 

 

6 

나는  이  기호들이  무엇을  의미하는지  모른다. 

3.3 Negation-related words 

Some  negatives  sentences  (e.g.  intensified  negatives  and  double  negatives)  are  accurately 

translated  in  Korean  not  only  by  adding  negative  suffix  to  the  Korean  predicate  but  also  by 

adding adverb and changing the particle to the subject or the object. 

a. If it is a single negative (one negative word in the sentence), the negation-related words 

are added according to the English negative word. 

- If the predicate verb is negated by adverb “not”, no related words are added. 

The rooms don’t have air-conditioners. 

방들에는  공기조화기가  없다. 

- If the negative word in the sentence is  “never”, “little” or “few”, the related adverbs are 

added to the Korean equivalent. 

She never looked like her photograph. 

그  녀자는  자기  사진과  전혀  비슷해보이지  않는다. 

b. If it is a partial negative, the particle added to the subject of a Korean equivalent changes 

from  는(은) to  가(이). 

Not all my friends were at the wedding. 

나의  모든  친구들이  결혼식에  참가한것은  아니였다. 

c. If it is an intensified negative in which the subject or the object is negated, the particle to 

the Korean subject or object noun should be changed or other related words added. 

-  If  the  subject  or  object  is  a  negative  pronoun  or  is  negated  by  the  determiner  “no”,  the 

particle to the Korean subject or object noun should be changed. 

Not one person remembered my birthday. 

한  사람도  나의  생일을  기억하지  못하였다.   

I have seen none of them before. 

나는  그들중  누구도  이전에  본적이  없다. 

-  If  the  subject  or  object  is  negated  by  the  determiner  “little”  or  “few”  to  make  a 

quasi-negative, negation-related words are added. 

Few students could answer the question. 

거의  모든  학생들이  그  질문에  대답할수  없었다. 

He showed little interest in my suggestion. 

그는  나의  제안에  거의  흥미를  보이지  않았다. 

d. If it is a double negative, the particles to the subject or the object should be changed and 

add negation-related words as the intensified negative. 

 

7 

I never said nothing about the plan. 

나는  그  계획에  대하여  아무것도  말하지  않았다. 

4.  The improved algorithm for the English negative sentences 

On the basis of the linguistic study described above, we established an improved algorithm 

for the English negative sentence translation in EKMT. The following diagram shows it. 

act The workflow of Translating English Negative Sentences into Korean 

Initial 

:Negation Count 

 
 

:Negation Type 

 
 

:Insert Position of 
Negative Words 

 
 

Korean Negative 

Suffix to the 

Predicate 

 

 Korean 

Negation-Related 

Adverb 

 
 

Korean Particle to 
Subject and Object 

 
 

Negation Count 

 

1 Single Negation 
2 Double Negation 

 

Negation Type 

 

General Negation 
Partial Negation 
Intensified Negation 
 

Insert Position of 
Negative Words 

 

After Predicate 
After Auxiliary 
 
 
{'~이 아니다,' '~지 

않다,' '~한적이 없다,' 

'~인것은 아니다,' 

'~하지는 않는다'} 

{'전혀,' '거의나,' 
'결코,'} 

{'도'} 

English Negative   

Sentence 

Decide the type of 
English negative 

sentence 

Decide the negative 
word and its insert 

position 

Decide the additional 

negation-related 

words 

Korean Negative   

Sentence 

Place the Korean 

negative word and its 

related words 

Final 

Fig.1. Algorithm for the English negative sentence translation 

 

5.  Evaluation 

We  applied 

the 

improved  algorithm 

to  English-to-Korean  Translation  System 

“Ryongnamsan” to improve its translation accuracy. The sample text was about the computer 

operating  system.  The  sentences  with  negative  words  are  518  or  8.2%  of  the  whole  6377 

sentences. The following table shows the number of negative sentences of each kind. 

 

 

8 

Single Negative 

Double Negative 

Others 

NS-AP-AO  AS-NP-AO  AS-AP-NO  NS-NP-AO  NS-AP-NO  AS-NP-NO 

 

56 

408 

41 

0 

0 

0 

13 

Table 2. Number of negative sentences of each kind 

There  were  5  partial  negative  sentences  among  505  single  negatives.  The  following 

examples  show  the  translation  results  of  the  partial  negative  and  intensified  negative  by  the 

proposed algorithm, in comparison with the earlier one. 

When a process is executed, it is not always executed at the site in which it is initiated. 

프로쎄스가  실행될  때  그것은  언제나  호출이  시작된  싸이트에서  실행되지 

않는다. (by the earlier algorithm) 

프로쎄스가  실행될  때  그것이  언제나  호출이  시작된  싸이트에서  실행되는것은 

아니다. (by the proposed algorithm) 

Servers cannot do so, since they have no knowledge of the purpose of the client's requests. 

그것들이  의뢰기의  요청들에  대한  지식을  가지지  않기때문에  봉사기들은 

그렇게  할수  없다. (by the earlier algorithm) 

그것들이  의뢰기의  요청들에  대한  그  어떤  지식도  가지지  않기때문에 

봉사기들은  그렇게  할수  없다. (by the proposed algorithm) 

As  the  examples  show,  the  proposed  algorithm  improved  the  translation  of  negative 

sentences, making it accurate and similar to the human translation. 

6.  Conclusion 

Negative sentences don’t account for large proportion in English text, but their translation is 

important. We did a comparative study on the negation in English and Korean to establish a 

new  translation  algorithm  in  EKMT  and  introduced  it  to  English-to-Korean  Machine 

Translation System “Ryongnamsan” and conclude that it is effective. 

7.  References 

[1]  Ronald  Carter  and  Michael  McCarthy  (2006).  Cambridge  Grammar  of  English, 

Cambridge University Press 

 

9 

