REAL TIME ERROR DETECTION IN METAL
ARC WELDING PROCESS USING ARTIFICIAL

NEURAL NETWORKS

Prashant Sharma1, Dr. Shaju K. Albert2 and S. Rajeswari3

1Computer Division, Indira Gandhi Centre For Atomic Research, Kalpakkam

2Material Technology Division, Indira Gandhi centre for Atomic Research, Kalpakkam

prashantcss@igcar.gov.in

3Computer Division, Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, Kalpakkam

shaju@igcar.gov.in

raj@igcar.gov.in

ABSTRACT 
Quality assurance in production line demands reliable weld joints. Human made errors is a major cause of
faulty production. Promptly Identifying errors in the weld while welding is in progress will decrease the post
inspection cost spent on the welding process. Electrical parameters generated during welding, could able to
characterize the process efficiently. Parameter values are collected using high speed data acquisition system.
Time series analysis tasks such as filtering, pattern recognition etc. are performed over the collected data.
Filtering   removes   the   unwanted   noisy   signal   components  and   pattern   recognition   task   segregate   error
patterns in the time series based upon similarity, which is performed by Self Organized mapping clustering
algorithm. Welder’s quality is thus compared by detecting and counting number of error patterns appeared in
his parametric time series. Moreover, Self Organized mapping algorithm provides the database in which
patterns are segregated into two classes either desirable or undesirable. Database thus generated is used to
train the classification algorithms, and thereby automating the real time error detection task. Multi Layer
Perceptron and Radial basis function are the two classification algorithms used, and their performance has
been compared based on metrics such as specificity, sensitivity, accuracy and time required in training.

KEYWORDS

Manual Metal Arc welding Process, Neural networks, Self Organized Mapping, Multi Layer Perceptron,
Radial Basis Functions 

1. INTRODUCTION
Manual Arc welding process, though carried out using specifically designed power sources, is a
dynamic and stochastic process due to random behavior of the electric arc and the metal transfer
that takes place during welding. Fluctuations in voltage and current are so rapid and random that a
high speed data acquisition system is required to capture these variations. Data thus, acquired can be
analyzed to derive characteristic feature of the welding process. Data collected is huge and contain
features corresponding to the performance of welding power source, welding consumables and the
welder. As far as power source and welding consumables are concerned, their qualities can be
improved by using better technology and better composition respectively. But process is greatly
affected by human made errors. Number of errors as well as uniformity of the weld greatly depends

upon the experience of welder. Presently existing techniques declare quality of welder by inspecting
the weld done by him, through various NDT techniques, which are time consuming and resource
intensive.  Amit   kumar   et   al.   has   done   a   detailed   study   on   utilization   of  ANN   in   welding
technology[1] and suggest ANN can be used to greatly optimize welding techniques.
T.   Polte   and   D.   Rehfeldt   [2]   suggest   better   alternative   for   declaring   weld   quality.   Electrical
parameters (current and voltage) obtained from power supply terminal are of random character and
varies over wide range. Consequently statistical behavior of these parameters is used to characterize
process, which can thereafter be used to detect the type of errors in the process. PDD transformation
of voltage time series is fed to the ANN to classify the type of errors. On the other hand, J. Mirapeix
and P.B. Garcia-Allende[3] used spectroscopic analysis of plasma spectra produced during welding
to monitor quality of resulting weld seams. Plasma spectra captured during welding process goes
through PCA technique, thereby reducing spectral dimensions and consequently they are fed to
ANN for fault  detection task. ANN is also used  by Hakan Ates[4]  for prediction of welding
parameters such as hardness, tensile strength, elongation and impact strength. A. Sanchez Roca
obtained a model using ANN for estimating stability of gas metal arc welding [5]. Application of
ANNs for prediction of the weld bead geometry using features derived from the infrared thermal
video of a welding process has also been done [6].
A novel and less computation intensive method of error detection is presented in this paper. Since
the electrical parameters are clear description of the process in real time, so rather than using their
PDD transformations we can directly use these waveforms to promptly recognize the process errors.
Artificial neural  networks (ANN) are employed  to analyze the processed data. Self  organized
mapping (SOM) [9] algorithm clusters the input voltage data based upon waveform similarity.
Database thus prepared is used to rank welders as well as it also trains classification algorithms.
Multi Layer Perceptron (MLP) and Radial Basis function (RBF) are two type of ANN classifiers
used to perform classification task on database obtained from SOM algorithm. Gradient descent
algorithm trains MLP model. In RBF, transformation to higher dimension is performed using K
means clustering algorithm [8], thereafter learning of separation boundary is done using gradient
descent algorithm. Both the ANN classifiers are able to perform classification task fairly accurately.
Performance of both has been compared.

2. EXPERIMENTAL 
Aim of the experiment is to acquire voltage and current values from terminals of power supply. Fig
shows block diagram of the setup deployed to perform data acquisition task.

Terminals 
cables

Ethernet
Connection

Figure 1.   Experimental Setup

Online monitoring of the welding process is done and measured signals are transferred to process
computer via Digital Signal Oscilloscope. Hall Effect current sensor measures current though power
cord and voltage differential probe measures voltage values across power supply terminals.  Voltage
and Current signals thus acquired can be considered as time series and they can be subjected to
various time series analysis. 

Constant current power supply subside the process variations in current signal thus only voltage
time series is selected for further processing. Data processing steps such as filtering, down sampling
and segmentation was applied to voltage time series and Figure 2 depicts every processing step.

2.1. Raw voltage time series

2. 2. Filtered voltage time series

Figure 2. figure 2.1 shows raw voltage waveform 2.2 shows filtered waveform and 2.3 shows

segments of filtered waveform

2.3. Segments of Filtered waveform

In Figure 2.3 third and fifth segments are most unsteady and these patterns correspond to error in
weld at that particular time. Detecting these patterns with data mining algorithm will help us to
pinpoint error in the weld in real time.
Every welder undergoes 3 trails, thus for 30 welders we are having 90 voltage time series. After
applying proper filtering technique, every voltage time series is segmented into 17 segments, each
of 100000 data points (thus each welder is having total of 51 segments from his three voltage time
series).This procedure give us total of 1530 segments, each of 1,00,000 data points. Thereafter
applying downsampling reduces data point in each segment from 100000 to just 50. As signal has
only low frequency contents, thus this much downsampling doesn’t affect overall shape of segment.
3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
Database of segment is not classified i.e. it is not known that which pattern belong to which class,
thus an  unsupervised clustering algorithm is  required to group together the patterns based on
similarity.  Therefore,   using  Self  Organized  Mapping unsupervised  clustering algorithm similar
patterns are grouped together to form 9 different groups. Groups that are clustering steady patterns
are identified and all the patterns clustered under it are marked as desirable patterns. And patterns
under other groups are marked as undesirable. As we already know that each welder has 51 patterns,
counting is done for number of undesirable pattern. Welder which has most number of undesirable
patterns is ranked the lowest and that is how the ranking is performed.

Table 1. Parameters of SOM algorithm

Table   2.  Number   of  patterns   clustered   by  each
clusters

Parameter
Number of training 
iteration

Number of training 
patterns
Dimension of each 
pattern
Initial learning rate
Current radius 
Rate of decreasing in 
radius
Number of clusters

Value
Until no considerable 
change in weight of 
clusters occurs
1530

  of   Patterns

No.
clustered

50

0.3
5.0
0.1

9

Cluster index
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

101
135
232
243
533
81
46
101
58

Weights of the cluster 4 and 5 came out to have least standard deviation. Thus all the patterns under
it are marked as desirable. And patterns under other clusters are marked as undesirable and these are
error patters. Now, the pattern database is classified and is suitable for supervised learning of
classification algorithm. This step will help in automating the task of error detection.

Database is now modified by marking 1 against the pattern which is belonging to desirable class
and marking 0 against the patterns that belongs to undesirable class. This modified database is used
for supervised learning of Multilayer Perceptron and radial basis function type neural networks.
70% of database is used for learning and 30% is used for testing. Comparative study of performance
of both networks on same database is done.

Table 3.  Parameter values for MLP 

Parameter
Number of training
iteration
Number of hidden
layer
Initial learning rate
Rate of decreasing
learning rate

Values
10000

1 and 2

0.3
0.001

Table 4.  Parameter values for RBF 

 

Parameter
Number
of
training iteration
Number
of
 
hidden layer
Initial   learning
rate

Values
10000

1

0.3

Regularization
parameter 

0.3

  SIMULATION RESULTS

3.1.
Training of classification algorithms is done using 1021 entries and last 509 entries are used for 
testing purpose. Selection of number of hidden nodes in single layer and double layer MLP was 
done based on study done by Wanas [7].

Table 6. Topology of MLP and RBF networks

MLP

Topology

True classification

misclassification

RBF

50-25-25-2
50-35-2
50-95-2
50-80-2

477
458
455
452

32
51
54
57

Table 7.  Comparison between RBF and MLP

%correct 
evaluatio
n
93.71
89.99
89.31
88.80

MULTILAYER PERCEPTRON

25 nodes Layer1
25 nodes Layer2

No of nodes
Sensitivity
Specificity
Accuracy%
Time required

35 nodes
0.8755
0.9246
89.9804

9mins 23secs

0.9572
0.9365
94.6955

16 mins 10 secs

RADIAL BASIS NETWORK

80 nodes
0.8055
0.9762
88.8016

1min 52secs

95 nodes
0.8288
0.9603
89.391

2 mins 9 sec

Table 6 suggest that 2 layer  MLP network  gave least % test error among the three types of
networks. % test error shown by RBF network was indeed highest, but time required for training the
RBF network was 5 times less as compared to that required by MLP network as shown in Table 7. It
is also seen that, specificity, which is the fraction of true negative classifications, was highest for
RBF network and sensitivity, which is the fraction of true positive classification, was highest for
two layer network. Comparison results between MLP and RBF are complying with the study done
by Santos et al. [10].
Choosing any of the two trained neural network (based upon the accuracy needed) we could able to
detect number of error patterns in the incoming voltage time series in real time, thereby detecting
the errors in weld in real time.

4. CONCLUSIONS:
Technique is developed to detect number of error patterns in a time series using Artificial Neural
Networks. Self Organized mapping algorithm could successfully segregate the steady patterns and
patterns that are in error. Reference database is generated using clustering process done by SOM.
Both MLP and RBF network can easily be trained with reference database and thereby be used to
classify an unknown pattern. Two layered MLP gave better error performance than RBF but training
time required by MLP was almost 5 times as that required by RBF.

5. REFERENCES:

1. Amit Kumar, Vikas Chauhan , Ankur Singh Bist, “Role of Artificial Neural Network in Welding

Technology: A Survey”, 2013, IJCA, vol 67, No. 1. 

2. T. Plote and D. Rehfeldt, “Gas metal arc welding process monitoring and quality evaluation using

neural networks”, IOM, 2000, Vol 5, No. 5.
J. Mirapeix, Realtime “Real-time  Arc-welding defect detection and classification with principal
component analysis using artificial neural networks”, Elsevier, 2007, vol 40, Issue 4, 315-323.

3.

4. Hakan Ates, “Prediction of gas metal arc welding parameters based on artificial neural networks”,

Elsevier, 2006, vol 8, Issue 7, 2015-2023.

5. A.   Sanchez   Roca   et.al,”  Artificial   Neural   Networks   and   acoustic   emission   applied   to   stability

analysis in gas metal arc welding”, STWJ, 2009, vol 14,  117-124.

6. P. Ghanty et al.,“Artificial neural network approach for estimating weld bead width and depth of

penetration from infrared thermal image of weld pool”, STWJ, 2008, vol 13, 395-401
7. Wanas N, “On optimal hidden nodes in neural network”, IEEE, 1998, vol 2, 918-921.
8. N   Benoudjit   and   M   Verleysen,   “On   the   Kernel-Widths   in   Radial   Basis   Function   Networks”,

IEEE,2003, 18, 139-154. 

9. Teuvo Kohonen, “The Self Organising Map”, 1998.
10. Santos, Tupp, Bonzi, Fileti, “Comparison Between Multilayer Feedforward Neural Networks and a
Radial Basis Function Network to Detect and Locate Leaks in Pipelines Transporting.2013, AIDIC,
vol 32.

