Published at NIPS Time-series Workshop - 2015

ODE - Augmented Training Improves

Anomaly Detection in Sensor Data from Machines

Mohit Yadav1, Pankaj Malhotra1, Lovekesh Vig1, K Sriram2, and Gautam Shroﬀ1

1- TCS Research, New-Delhi, India

2- IIIT, New-Delhi, India

May 6, 2016

Abstract

Machines of all kinds from vehicles to industrial equipment are increasingly instrumented with hundreds of sensors.
Using such data to detect “anomalous” behaviour is critical for safety and eﬃcient maintenance. However, anomalies occur
rarely and with great variety in such systems, so there is often insuﬃcient anomalous data to build reliable detectors.
A standard approach to mitigate this problem is to use one class methods relying only on data from normal behaviour.
Unfortunately, even these approaches are more likely to fail in the scenario of a dynamical system with manual control
input(s). Normal behaviour in response to novel control input(s) might look very diﬀerent to the learned detector which may
be incorrectly detected as anomalous. In this paper, we address this issue by modelling time-series via Ordinary Diﬀerential
Equations (ODE) and utilising such an ODE model to simulate the behaviour of dynamical systems under varying control
inputs. The available data is then augmented with data generated from the ODE, and the anomaly detector is retrained on
this augmented dataset. Experiments demonstrate that ODE-augmented training data allows better coverage of possible
control input(s) and results in learning more accurate distinctions between normal and anomalous behaviour in time-series.

6
1
0
2

 

y
a
M
5

 

 
 
]
I

A
.
s
c
[
 
 

1 Introduction

1
v
4
3
5
1
0

.

5
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Modern machines are increasingly instrumented with hundreds and even thousands of sensors. Moreover, with the advent of
what is being called the “industrial internet”, such sensors are also able to regularly transmit their data to the component (e.g.,
engine) manufacturer, OEM (e.g., aircraft / car manufacturer) or even operator (e.g., airline / trucking company). Detecting
“anomalous” behaviour from such sensor data is important to be able to, a) indicate signs of degraded performance to trigger
early maintenance, b) predict failures before they actually happen, i.e., prognostics and c) serve as indicators to forecast
potential product recalls when aggregated at a population level. A number of algorithms for anomaly detection have been
proposed using a variety of data arising from ﬁnancial markets, diagnostic systems, biological systems, and various other
sources [1]. Since normal data is more easily available, a typical anomaly detection algorithm learns the behaviour of “normal”
data and uses deviations from it to determine anomalies [2, 3, 4, 5].

Traditionally, statistical techniques such as cumulative sum (CUMSUM) and exponentially weighted moving average
(EWMA) over a time window have been applied to detect variation from the underlying distribution of normal data [6]. Yet
another set of approaches are based on one-class SVM learning [7, 8]. Predictive approaches attempt to predict the time-
series and detect anomalies by learning a threshold on prediction errors [9, 10]. An important disadvantage of most of these
approaches is their dependence on the choice of window length. Recently, a predictive deep Long-Short-Term-Memory based
Anomaly Detection (LSTM-AD) has been proposed [4, 5] to overcome the requirement of a pre-speciﬁed context window or
data pre-processing. LSTM-AD is a robust times-series prediction model, as it can capture: i) long term temporal correlations,
ii) correlations across dimensions in a multivariate time-series, and iii) temporal patterns across diﬀerent resolutions. In this
paper, we utilize the LSTM-AD approach and provide its description in Section 2.3.

For dynamical systems, ODE models can leverage domain information and also take advantage of data-driven machine-
learning methodologies [11]. However to the best of our knowledge, hybrid strategies that marry ODE with machine learning
have not made use of the inherent generative capability of ODEs. In this paper, we propose that an ODE based model can
be used as a generative model for time-series data to overcome the diﬃculty in learning and predicting time-series when only
a limited amount of normal data is available. Small volumes of normal data often contain insuﬃcient variations of manual
control input(s), thereby limiting the behaviour patterns that can be learned. An ODE based model can be used to augment
data by simulating novel manual control input(s) not present in the available data. We show that when such augmented
data is fed to LSTM-AD it learns a better discriminator between normal and anomalous behaviour. We assume that the

Copyright c(cid:13) 2015 Tata Consultancy Services Ltd.

1

TCS Research

Published at NIPS Time-series Workshop - 2015

structure of the ODE model is available from domain knowledge and estimate parameters of such an ODE model from the
data. However, note that both the structure and order of an ODE model can in principle be learned from data as shown
in [12, 13, 14, 15]. The remainder of this paper is organised as follows: In Section 2, we present the proposed approach,
including the way used for estimating ODE parameters, generating data using an ODE model, and LSTM-AD based anomaly
detection. Section 3 presents experiments and results. Lastly, we provide conclusion in Section 4.

2 Proposed Approach
Consider a multivariate time-series X = {x(1), x(2), ..., x(n)}, where each point x(t) ∈ Rm in the time series is an m-dimensional
vector of variables/sensors. Time series data arising from a controlled dynamical system can usually be divided into two sets
of variables: Xc being a set ‘control’ variables such as accelerator pedal position (APP), and Xd which represents ‘dependent’
variables such as coolant temperature (CT), torque, etc. In our application, we observe that the behaviour of control variables
was often relatively simple (as depicted in the top panel of Fig.1), which allows us to model them using statistical distributions
and to generate synthetic data by sampling these distributions. We learn an ODE model for the dependent variables Xd
(expressed as a function of Xc and Xd), using which we generate data for Xd corresponding to synthetically produced novel
manual control variables Xc, as explained latter in Section 2.2. Finally, we make use of ODE-generated time-series data
comprising of both sets (Xc and Xd) of sensors to augment the training set for an LSTM-AD model, which can be used to
detect anomalous, i.e., non-normal behaviour.

2.1 Learning ODE parameters

w(t), P 1

w(t), P 2

An ODE model for a dependent variable Xd can be represented as in Eq. 1, where Pw(t) corresponds to the parameters
(Pw(t) = P 0
w(t)) of the ODE within a time window w(t). The task of learning an ODE model can be divided
into two sub-tasks: 1) estimate the structure f (Pw(t), Xd(t), Xc(t)), i.e., nature of interaction among dependent and control
variables, and 2) estimate the parameters Pw(t). For ﬁrst sub-task, we anticipate that the ODE model is available from domain
knowledge. For example, an ODE structure to model coolant temperature (CT) is mentioned in Eq. 1 (where Xd = CT
and Xc = AP P ), and similar models are also used in [11]. The second sub-task, i.e., estimating Pw(t) is non-trivial as the
gradients of time-series of sensors present in Xd are unknown (LHS of Eq. 1). We utilize numerical gradient approximation
by Taylor-series expansion to estimate LHS of Eq. 1, which reduces the task to simple regression which can be handled using
stochastic gradient descent [16], provided df /dP can be computed. However, numerical gradient approximation is not very
robust at points with high curvature and/or noise, and a small error in parameter estimation can cause solutions to diverge
while integrating ODE models. Also, we have a relatively small number of parameters to estimate when compared with the
number of available data-points. Therefore, we smooth the data and drop some of the data-points from the high curvature
(sum of ﬁrst few numerically computed derivatives) regions of time-series.

We optimize the parameters to minimize the root mean square error between the original data and the data obtained
after numerical integration of the ODE model. One can further reﬁne the parameters using a gradient-free optimization
like particle swarm optimization (PSO). We suggest to initialise PSO using multiple solutions obtained by gradient learning.
These solutions correspond to data-points obtained by dropping high curvature points from the time-series data. These
solutions can also help in restricting the search space, and therefore, reduce the search time taken by PSO. (Note that for
the example in Eq. 1 and the data used in this paper, we found that the reﬁnement by PSO on initialized solutions was not
signiﬁcant, as the ODE structure is relatively simple.)

dXd(t)

dt

= f (Pw(t), Xd(t), Xc(t)) ; e.g.,

dCT (t)

dt

= P 0

w(t) ∗ AP P (t) − P 1

w(t) ∗ CT (t) + P 2

w(t)

(1)

2.2 Using ODE to Generate Data
As mentioned in Section 2.1, the behaviour of the control variable(s) (Xc = {AP P}) is often relatively simple, e.g., the
APP operates in two states: ‘high’ and ‘low’ as depicted in the top panel of Fig. 1. We learn statistical distributions, i.e.,
histograms for both duration and level of each state using available training data and further sample these distributions to
generate novel manual control inputs. For dependent variable(s) (Xd = {CT}), we numerically integrate the learned ODE
model for novel control inputs(s) (Xc = {AP P}). The ODE parameters are learnt for all the time-series pairs (AP P ,CT )
available in the training and one such pair is used in generating the data for a novel control input(s) (Xc = {AP P}). We
have used Euclidean distance (between durations and level of both states, after normalization as they have diﬀerent scales)
as a criterion to select one such pair.

Copyright c(cid:13) 2015 Tata Consultancy Services Ltd.

2

TCS Research

2.3 LSTM-AD: LSTM-based Anomaly Detection

Published at NIPS Time-series Workshop - 2015

Figure 1: Sample data for accelerator pedal position (APP), ODE-generated (red) and real (green) coolant temperature (CT)
arising from engine application. Figure best viewed magniﬁed.

2.3 LSTM-AD: LSTM-based Anomaly Detection
We learn a stacked / deep LSTM based prediction model where x(t) is used to predict {x(t+1), ..., x(t+l)}, i.e., time-series for
next l time-steps. An error vector e(t) for point x(t) is given by e(t) = [e(t)
is the diﬀerence between
x(t) and its value as predicted at time t− i. The likelihood of a point x(t) being normal is given by the likelihood score of the
corresponding error vector e(t) computed from a learned Gaussian probability density function over the set of error vectors
from the normal data. The parameters of the Gaussian distribution are estimated using Maximum Likelihood Estimation
over a set of error vectors from normal time-series data. Further, a threshold on likelihood scores is estimated by maximizing
F-score so that points with likelihood score below the threshold are considered to be anomalous points. Diﬀerent validation
sets were used to avoid over-ﬁtting while learning network parameters, prediction length and threshold for likelihood scores.
For further details on LSTM-AD, readers can look at [4].

], where e(t)

i

1 , e(t)

2 , ..., e(t)

l

3 Experiments and Results

We evaluate performance of the proposed approach on a sensor data arising from a real world vehicle-engine application. Two
sensors in this dataset are APP and CT, where the former is a manual control sensor and the latter is a dependent sensor.
We inject diﬀerent types of anomalies in the time-series recorded for normal CT operation to obtain data for anomalous
behaviour [3]. The following anomaly types were inserted: 1) sudden occurrence of zero value for short duration, 2) value
being higher/lower than the normally observed range, 3) dependent sensor CT deviating from expected behaviour, i.e, CT
behaving as if control sensor is low when it was actually high, 4) noise in a randomly selected part of the time-series, and
5) gradual increase in values of CT sensor beyond the maximum observed value during normal behaviour. Instances of type
1 and type 2 are shown in (red coloured portion in third panel of) Fig. 2. We further introduce semantic information by
injecting anomalies in the randomly selected regions of high state of control sensor, except for anomaly type 4, which was
injected in the randomly selected regions of both the states. To show the value of data generated using the ODE model,
we train LSTM-AD model with ﬁve diﬀerent training datasets, namely, real large/small data (L(r)/S(r)), ODE-generated
(ODE(s)), ODE-augmented large/small data (L(r)/S(r) + ODE(s)). For every training dataset, we tried several deep and
shallow architectures of LSTM and chose the one with best performance on the validation set. Results in Table-1 show
improvements in precision and F-score using ODE-augmented datasets(S(r)/L(r) + ODE(s)) when compared to the real data
(S(r)/L(r)). Also in Fig.3, F-score has improved with progression of the ODE-generated data into to S(r). Fig.2 shows an
instance of type 1 anomaly missed (detected) when the model is trained on S(r) ( S(r)+ODE(s) ), as highlighted the grayed
out region.

4 Conclusion

Insuﬃcient data can pose challenges for training machine learning algorithms for anomaly detection, particularly for deep
models. In this paper, we leverage ODE models from domain knowledge to augment time-series data arising from dynamical
systems. The augmented time-series data was shown to be useful in learning normal behaviour more robustly. We claim
the beneﬁts of the ODE-augmented data is due to the fact that it contains suﬃcient data for the normal behaviour of a
dynamical system with a larger collection of variations in the manual control input(s). In future, it will be interesting to
investigate the possibility of a purely data-driven ODE based approach [12, 13].

Copyright c(cid:13) 2015 Tata Consultancy Services Ltd.

3

TCS Research

REFERENCES

Published at NIPS Time-series Workshop - 2015

Figure 2: From the top, panel-1, panel-2 and panel-3 contains time-series for APP, CT1, i.e., normal CT prior to anomaly
insertion , and CT2, i.e., anomalous CT obtained after injecting anomalies (type 1 & 2) respectively. Panel-4 and panel-
5 show log-likelihoods (and thresholds) of model learned using small real (S(r)) dataset and its ODE-augmented dataset
(S(r)+ODE(s)).

Train datasets
L(r)
S(r)
ODE(s)
S(r)+ODE(s)
L(r)+ODE(s)

NS
322
40
125
165
447

NP
34823
3571
13598
17169
48421

P
0.41
0.34
0.32
0.52
0.56

R
0.84
0.85
0.82
0.83
0.84

F
0.55
0.49
0.46
0.64
0.67

Figure 3: F-Score with respect to addition of ODE-generated
data (ODE(s)) to real small dataset (S(r)). Figure best
viewed magniﬁed.

Table 1: Precision(P), Recall(R) and F-scores(F)
for original real Large/Small data (L(r)/S(r)) and
ODE-generated data (ODE(s)). NS/NP implies
no. of time-series/data-points.

References

[1] Gupta, M., Gao, J., Aggarwal, C., Han, J.: Outlier detection for temporal data. Synthesis Lectures on Data Mining

and Knowledge Discovery 5(1) (2014) 1–129

[2] Pimentel, M.A., Clifton, D.A., Clifton, L., Tarassenko, L.: A review of novelty detection. Signal Processing 99 (2014)

215–249

[3] Jones, M., Nikovski, D., Imamura, M., Hirata, T.: Anomaly detection in real-valued multidimensional time series.

Academy of Science and Engineering (ASE), USA, c(cid:13) ASE 2014 (2014)

[4] Malhotra, P., Vig, L., Shroﬀ, G., Agarwal, P.: Long short term memory networks for anomaly detection in time series.

ESANN (2015) 89–94

[5] Chouhan, S., Vig, L.: Anomaly detection in ecg time signals through deep long short-term memory based recurrent

neural network architecture. DSAA (2015) To appear

[6] Basseville, M., Nikiforov, I.V.: Detection of Abrupt Changes: Theory and Application. Prentice-Hall, Inc., Upper

Saddle River, NJ, USA (1993)

[7] Ma, J., Perkins, S.: Time-series novelty detection using one-class support vector machines. In: Neural Networks, 2003.

Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on. Volume 3., IEEE (2003) 1741–1745

[8] Amer, M., Goldstein, M., Abdennadher, S.: Enhancing one-class support vector machines for unsupervised anomaly
detection. In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD Workshop on Outlier Detection and Description. ODD ’13, New York,
NY, USA, ACM (2013) 8–15

[9] Ma, J., Perkins, S.: Online novelty detection on temporal sequences. In: Proceedings of the Ninth ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. KDD ’03, New York, NY, USA, ACM (2003)
613–618

Copyright c(cid:13) 2015 Tata Consultancy Services Ltd.

4

TCS Research

REFERENCES

Published at NIPS Time-series Workshop - 2015

[10] Hayton, P., Utete, S., King, D., King, S., Anuzis, P., Tarassenko, L.: Static and dynamic novelty detection methods for
jet engine health monitoring. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London A: Mathematical, Physical and
Engineering Sciences 365(1851) (2007) 493–514

[11] Alvarez, M.A., Luengo, D., Lawrence, N.D.: Latent force models. In: International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence

and Statistics. (2009) 9–16

[12] Yuehui, C., Bin, Y., Qingfang, M., Yaou, Z., Ajith, A.: Time-series forecasting using a system of ordinary diﬀerential

equations. Information Sciences 181(1) (2011) 106 – 114

[13] Kantz, H., Schreiber, T.: Nonlinear time series analysis. Volume 7. Cambridge university press (2004)

[14] Krizman, V., Saso, D., Boris, K.: Discovering dynamics from measured data. Electrotechnical Review 62.3-4 (1995)

191–198

[15] Klikova, B., Raidl, A.: Reconstruction of phase space of dynamical systems using method of time delay. WDS ’2011

[16] Darken, C., Moody, J.: Towards faster stochastic gradient search. In: NIPS. (1991) 1009–1016

Copyright c(cid:13) 2015 Tata Consultancy Services Ltd.

5

TCS Research

