6
1
0
2

 

g
u
A
4

 

 
 
]

V
C
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
8
5
6
1
0

.

8
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Identifying Metastases in Sentinel Lymph
Nodes with Deep Convolutional Neural

Networks

Richard Chen

Proscia Inc.

Yating Jing
Proscia Inc.

Hunter Jackson

Proscia Inc.

Abstract—Metastatic presence in lymph nodes is
one of the most important prognostic variables of
breast cancer. The current diagnostic procedure for
manually reviewing sentinel lymph nodes, however,
is very time-consuming and subjective. Pathologists
have to manually scan an entire digital whole-
slide image (WSI) for regions of metastasis that
are sometimes only detectable under high resolution
or entirely hidden from the human visual cortex.
From October 2015 to April 2016, the International
Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI) held the
Camelyon Grand Challenge 2016 to crowd-source
ideas and algorithms for automatic detection of
lymph node metastasis. Using a generalizable stain
normalization technique and the Proscia Pathology
Cloud computing platform, we trained a deep con-
volutional neural network on millions of tissue and
tumor image tiles to perform slide-based evaluation
on our testing set of whole-slide images images, with
a sensitivity of 0.96, speciﬁcity of 0.89, and AUC score
of 0.90. Our results indicate that our platform can
automatically scan any WSI for metastatic regions
without institutional calibration to respective stain
proﬁles.

INTRODUCTION

Digital Pathology

Pathology is a 150-year-old medical specialty
[1] that has seen a paradigm shift over the past
few years with the advent of digital pathology. The
digitization of tissue slides introduces a plethora of
opportunities to leverage computer-assisted tech-
nologies to aid pathologists in diagnosing cancer
[2]. While proliferation of digital pathology is at
an all time high, the industry has not crossed the
rubicon into clinical diagnostics due to lack of
standardization of image formats, system noise,

and lack of clinical and technical studies on digital
pathology systems.

The inherent problem in pathology is subjec-
tivity. The discipline is plagued with human vari-
ability from tissue acquisition, improper staining
techniques, and subjectivity in diagnosing under a
microscope. A pathologist looks for patterns in a
tissue sample and uses his/her medical training to
interpret those patterns and make a diagnosis [3].
As evidenced through many applications in myriad
industries, computer-assisted pattern recognition
software can match or even supersede a human’s
ability to recognize patterns [4].

Though digital pathology is on the precipice
of wide-spread adoption, the difﬁculties in hard-
ware scanning variability and fear of ”black-box”
computational tools has lead to a longer adoption
curve than seen in other medical specialties that
have gone totally digital, e.g. radiology [5].

Region of Interest (ROI) detection algorithms,
like the one proposed here have the potential to
act as an intermediary clinical decision support
tool, rather than immediately moving to a fully
computerized diagnostic procedure [6]. ROI de-
tection tools cut down time for analyzing whole
slide tissue sections by reducing the signal-to-noise
ratio and directing the pathologist to those regions
that are ﬂagged for containing certain properties
indicative of the region of interest, as learned by
the model.

While computerized primary diagnosis is still
in its nascent stages, these such tools provide an
expedient route to enabling precision medicine in

pathology by automating the ROI detection and
alleviating diagnostic subjectivity.

Camelyon Competition

From October 2015 to April 2016,

the In-
ternational Symposium on Biomedical Imaging
(ISBI) held the Camelyon Grand Challenge 2016
to crowd-source ideas and algorithms for automatic
detection of lymph node metastasis [7] [8]. The
following two metrics in the challenge were used
to evaluate the performance of the algorithms:

1)

2)

Slide-based Evaluation: algorithm perfor-
mance on discriminating between normal
slides and metastasis slides
Lesion-based Evaluation: algorithm per-
formance on lesion detection and local-
ization

The dataset in the challenge contains a total of
400 whole-slide images (WSIs) of sentinel lymph
node from two independent datasets collected in
Radboud University Medical Center (UMC) (Ni-
jmegen, the Netherlands) and the UMC Utrecht
(Utrecht, the Netherlands). Whole-slide images are
large image ﬁles organized in a multi-resolution
pyramid structure,
in which each image in the
pyramid is a downsampled version of the highest
resolution image. The ﬁrst training dataset consists
of 170 WSIs of lymph node (100 Normal and 70
Tumor) and the second training dataset consists
of 100 WSIs (60 Normal and 40 Tumor). The
ﬁrst testing dataset consists of 80 WSIs and the
second testing dataset consists of 50 WSIs. The
ground truth data of the training set came from a
pathologist who manually drew contours of regions
of lymph node metastasis.

Because the labeled data for the test set was
never made public in the Camelyon Challenge, we
performed a 60-20-20 train-validation-test split on
the 270 WSIs provided as training data. In addition,
we only tested the performance of our algorithms
using slide-based evaluation. Our results are based
on a small subset of the entire image set; how-
ever, these initial results are motivation for further
work on the entire dataset and completion of the
Camelyon challenge.

METHOD

Our framework for detecting metastases in sen-
tinel lymph nodes can be modularized into four
components:
image preprocessing and tiling of
WSIs, color deconvolution and stain normaliza-
tion of WSI tiles, tile-based classiﬁcation using
convolutional neural networks (CNNs), and post-
processing of tumor probability heatmaps of the
WSIs. The libraries and scientiﬁc packages used
were OpenSlide, NumPy, Pillow, OpenCV, Caffe,
and pyCaffe.

Image Preprocessing & Tiling

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Fig. 1: Image preprocessing steps for tissue seg-
mentation. (a) Original Image (b) HSV colorspace
(c) Saturation channel (d) Median blur (e) Otsu’s
Binarization (e) Original Image with contour over-
lay

For each WSI, we perform a connected com-
ponents analysis to draw contours around only
tissue regions of the slide, cutting down total
pixels processed by over 70%. Speciﬁcally, we
transformed the WSI’s RGB color vector to the
HSV colorspace and performed Otsu’s Binarization
on only the saturation channel to separate brightly-
stained tissue regions from the gray space of the
background region. We also used a median blur
to ﬁlter out fatty tissue and background artifacts.

Fig. 2: AlexNet Layer Architecture

To reduce computational run-time, we performed
all of our segmentation on a downsampled version
of the original image and scaled the pixel coordi-
nates of the contour regions to the dimension with
the highest resolution. Speciﬁcally, we performed
segmentation on the thumbnail dimension of all
the WSI’s. Using OpenSlide [9], we were able to
compute level-based dimensions which are used to
create a linear scaling function to scale contours
created at any resolution to be represented in a
higher dimensional resolution space without losing
any contour information. Knowing the downsample
factor from the thumbnail dimension to the level
1 dimension of the WSI, we perform a scale
transformation and rapidly calculate the contours of
the tissue region at the highest spatial resolution of
the image. Finally, within each contour region, we
partitioned the tissue and tumor regions into 256
x 256 tiles at 40x (level 1) using a fully parallel
computing architecture in the Pathology Cloud
Computing Platform that expedites the process of
creating the training set.

Stain Normalization

Since the Camelyon challenge dataset was gen-
erated from two separate institutions, we wanted to
eliminate any stain variability that could negatively
affect training and testing. By performing stain
normalization, we can perform a non-linear color
feature mapping that maps all of the respective
training images by to a target stain. Without elim-
ination of the stain variability, the heterogeneity
introduce bias to our model,
of the stains will

inducing a bimodal stain vector color distribution.
We performed stain normalization on each 256 x
256 tile generated during WSI tiling.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 3: An example of stain normalization on a
heavily overstained source image (a) Source Image
(b) Target Image (c) Output Image

Tile-Based Classiﬁcation using Convolutional Neu-
ral Networks

After creating a training set of 256 x 256
tiles, we trained a convolutional neural network
to discriminate between tissue and tumor tiles.
Namely, we chose AlexNet [10]. The architecture
of AlexNet consists of ﬁve convolutional and three
fully-connected learned layers, 60 million parame-
ters, and a two-way softmax to assign probabilities
to the tissue and tumor class labels. In addition to
stain normalization, we preprocessed each training
image by subtracting the mean activity over the
training set from each pixel. We also extracted
random 224 x 224 patches and their horizontal
reﬂections from each 256 x 256 tile in our training
set and trained our model on these patches to

prevent overﬁtting.

Post-Processing of Tumor Probability Heatmap

Given a WSI in the Camelyon training data,
we generated its corresponding tumor probability
heatmap, with each pixel assigned a value p for
p ∈ [0, 1], indicating the probability of metas-
tasis. To analyze these heatmaps efﬁciently, we
generated tumor probability heatmaps at level 4
instead of level 0 due to computational complex-
ity. To accomplish this, for every tile within the
tissue and contour regions at
level 0, we used
our AlexNet model to assign a probability to each
tile, and color-mapped that tile’s probability to its
corresponding downsampled tile at level 4. In the
pyramidal structure of each WSI, the image at level
4 is 8 downsamples greater than the image at level
0. Speciﬁcally, for a 256 x 256 tile at level 4,
it would take 64 256 x 256 tiles at level 0 to
represent the same region in the image. As a result,
probabilities assigned to 256 x 256 tiles at level 1
can be mapped and colored to 32 x 32 pixel regions
at level 4. After generating the tumor probability
heatmap, we performed post-processing for slide-
based evaluation.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 4: A comparison between the (a) ground
truth data of Tumor 087 and (b) tumor probability
heatmap of Tumor 087

For slide-based evaluation, a 60-20-20 train-
validation-test split was done on 270 tumor proba-
bility heatmaps generated from the WSIs provided
as training data, with each partition having an
approximately equal proportion of tumor to tissue

tiles. For each heatmap, we computed geometrical
and morphological features about its tumor prob-
ability distribution. Such features include: max,
mean, variance, skewness, and kurtosis of (area,
perimeter, compactness, rectangularity, solidity of
tumor regions), average prediction across tumor
region,
total number of tumor regions, and the
total number pixels with probability greater than
0.90. After computing these features, we trained a
Random Forest classiﬁer, and used it to evaluate
our test set of WSIs.

EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

We ﬁrst evaluated tile-based classiﬁcation accu-
racy with and without stain normalization. Under
this evaluation metric, where we were able to
accurately classify all given tiles in the test set as
belonging to a tissue region or a metastatic region
with 92.7% without stain normalization, and 96.6%
accuracy with stain normalization. Because we
achieved a higher tile-based classiﬁcation accuracy
under stain normalization, we performed slide-
based evaluation with this extra pre-processing
step.

For slide-based evaluation, the Random Forest
classiﬁer yielded an average image-based classiﬁ-
cation sensitivity of .96, average speciﬁcity of .89,
and a computed area under the Receiver Operating
Characteristic Curve (AUC) score of 0.90.

CONCLUSION

The results of the study show that stain nor-
malization is a crucial part of building a generaliz-
able deep learning model for identifying metastatic
regions in sentinel lymph nodes, as it eliminates
the variability induced by different stains from the
two locations. This process signiﬁcantly improved
classiﬁcation performance of our model and in-
dicates that this model could be extended to any
breast cancer digitized images without institutional
recalibration. Our algorithms and model will be
subject to additional training and validation on the
full image set provided by ISBI and the Camelyon
Challenge 2016. We are grateful to the organizers
and all
those involved in the competition, and
we look forward to improving our results and
computing a tumor localization score for the fully
trained model.

REFERENCES

[1] Paolo Scarani. Rudolf virchow (1821–1902). Virchows

Archiv, 442(2):95–98, 2003.

[3]

[4]

[2] Shaimaa Al-Janabi, Andr Huisman, and Paul J Van Diest.
Digital pathology: current status and future perspectives.
Histopathology, 61(1):1–9, 2012.
Joann G. Elmore, Gary M. Longton, Patricia A. Carney,
Berta M. Geller, Tracy Onega, Anna N. A. Tosteson,
Heidi D. Nelson, Margaret S. Pepe, Kimberly H. Allison,
Stuart J. Schnitt, and et al. Diagnostic concordance
among pathologists interpreting breast biopsy specimens.
Jama, 313(11):1122, 2015.
Joseph P Houghton, Carol P Wilson, and Michael J
Dolaghan. Digital pathology imaging offers more bene-
ﬁts than glass slides and microscopes. BMJ, 354, 2016.
[5] Michael. Montalto. An industry perspective: An update
Journal of

on the adoption of whole slide imaging.
Pathology Informatics, 7(1):18, 2016.

[6] Metin N. Gurcan, Senior Member, Laura E. Boucheron,
Ali Can, Anant Madabhushi, Senior Member, Nasir M.
Rajpoot, Bulent Yener, and Senior Member. Histopatho-
IEEE Reviews in
logical
Biomedical Engineering, pages 147–171, 2009.
Isbi challenge on cancer metastasis detection in lymph
node.

image analysis: A review.

[7]

[8] Dayong Wang, Aditya Khosla, Rishab Gargeya, Hu-
mayun Irshad, and Andrew H. Beck. Deep learning for
identifying metastatic breast cancer. Arxiv, 2016.

[9] Adam Goode, Benjamin Gilbert, Jan Harkes, Drazen
Jukic, and Mahadev Satyanarayanan. OpenSlide: A
vendor-neutral software foundation for digital pathology.
Journal of pathology informatics, 4, 2013.

[10] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E. Hinton.
Imagenet classiﬁcation with deep convolutional neural
networks. pages 1097–1105, 2012.

